Initial draft of policies and guidelines for libcudf usage. (#11853)
rapidsai/cudf: cpp/doxygen/developer_guide/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md

data, a specialized device view for list columns can be constructed via
`lists_column_device_view(column_device_view)`.

# libcudf policies and design principles

Some aspects of libcudf usage may be surprising to new users.
As a performance-oriented library, many design decisions prioritize flexibility and performance in ways that require some additional work or input from client code.
We document these policies and the reasons behind them here:

## libcudf does not introspect data

libcudf APIs generally do not perform deep introspection and validation of input data.
There are numerous reasons for this:
1. It violates the single responsibility principle: validation is separate from execution.

> 2. Since libcudf data structures store data on the GPU, any validation incurs the minimal overhead of a kernel launch.

Reviewer: This makes it sound like validation would only be a minimal impact. I think the intent here is more that it, at best, is a the impact of the kernel launch, but is cost prohibitive overall.

3. API promises around data introspection often significantly complicate implementation.

Users are therefore responsible for passing valid data into such APIs.
_Note that this policy does not mean that libcudf performs no validation whatsoever_.

> libcudf APIs should still perform any validation that does not require introspection, such as checking whether input column/table sizes or dtypes are appropriate.

Reviewer 2: This extends to output sizes and results as well.

In general there is no validation that an operation will produce a column that fits in the 2GB limit. There are a few minor exceptions where the validation does not require an extra kernel launch.

Also, operations that may produce overflow (integer or floating-point arithmetic) are also not checked. Overflow produces undefined results. For example, integer overflow to negative values is not guaranteed.

Author: My intent here was not to provide exhaustive lists of things we will and will not check, but rather to provide some examples of cases to illustrate the difference between introspective and non-introspective operations. I am wary of trying to maintain a complete list that will inevitably go out of date the day after it is published. Do you think it's worth trying to keep a larger list?

Reviewer 2: I suppose I would like to keep a list of things that keep being brought up (like these two here) so that I can point to this document to say this is by design.

Reviewer 3: I agree this does not need to be _exhaustive_, but it would be nice if this policy guide can serve as a mini-FAQ of "why is libcudf designed this way?" I think that the concrete examples @davidwendt mentioned help illustrate the philosophy of the library.

Author: I've added some, and I've reworded this section to reflect that we want to keep a list but make no promises that it's exhaustive.

> **TODO: What about checking null counts? The most likely path to fixing the implicit kernel invocation in `null_count` (which we have to remove in order to present a safe stream-ordered API) is forcing specification of the null count on construction, which would make checking null counts a cheap operation.**

Author: Well, the question is whether we should include checking anything around null counts in the list of things that libcudf should validate. If null counts are known a priori then I would argue that we should at least validate cases where we need `null_count == 0`.

> **TODO: What about checking null counts? The most likely path to fixing the implicit kernel invocation in `null_count` (which we have to remove in order to present a safe stream-ordered API) is forcing specification of the null count on construction, which would make checking null counts a cheap operation.**

Reviewer 3: Yes — if null counts are always known (on the host?) then checking for nulls would have a similar cost to checking dtypes or input sizes. We just don’t want to incur kernel launches during validation.

## libcudf will not sanitize nulls for nested types

Various libcudf APIs accepting columns of nested dtypes (such as `LIST` or `STRUCT`) may assume that these columns have been sanitized.
In this context, sanitization refers to ensuring that the null elements in a column with a nested dtype are compatible with the elements of nested columns.
Specifically:
- Null elements of list columns should also be empty. They should not contain arbitrary data.

> - Null elements of struct columns should also be null elements in the underlying structs.

Reviewer 2: There is also the rule that compound columns contain nulls and a valid offset only at the parent level. Children do not have null masks, null counts, or an offset value (i.e. offset > 0 can occur on sliced columns).

data, a specialized device view for list columns can be constructed via
`lists_column_device_view(column_device_view)`.

# libcudf Policies and Design Principles

> `libcudf` is designed to provide GPU-accelerated algorithm primitives for solving a wide variety of problems that arise in data science.
> Our goal is to enable diverse use cases like Spark or Pandas to benefit from the performance of GPUs. 

Author: ```suggestion
`libcudf` is designed to provide thread-safe, single-GPU accelerated algorithm primitives for solving a wide variety of problems that arise in data science.
APIs are written to execute on the default GPU, which can be controlled by the caller through standard CUDA device APIs or environment variables like `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES`.
Our goal is to enable diverse use cases like Spark or Pandas to benefit from the performance of GPUs, and libcudf relies on these higher-level layers like Spark or Dask to orchestrate multi-GPU tasks.

```

> As a result, libcudf prioritizes performance and flexibility, which sometimes may come at the cost of convenience.

Author: ```suggestion
To best satisfy these use-cases, libcudf prioritizes performance and flexibility, which sometimes may come at the cost of convenience.
```

data, a specialized device view for list columns can be constructed via
`lists_column_device_view(column_device_view)`.

# libcudf Policies and Design Principles

> Some aspects of libcudf usage may be surprising to new users.
> As a performance-oriented library, many design decisions prioritize flexibility and performance in ways that require some additional work or input from client code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`libcudf` is designed to provide GPU-accelerated algorithm primitives for solving a wide variety of problems that arise in data science.
Our goal is to enable diverse use cases like Spark or Pandas to benefit from the performance of GPUs. 
As a result, libcudf prioritizes performance and flexibility, which sometimes may come at the cost of convenience.
While we welcome users to use libcudf directly, we design with the expectation that most users will be consuming libcudf through higher-level layers like Spark or cuDF Python. 
```

In this context, sanitization refers to ensuring that the null elements in a column with a nested dtype are compatible with the elements of nested columns.
Specifically:
- Null elements of list columns should also be empty. The starting offset of a null element should be equal to the ending offset.
- Null elements of struct columns should also be null elements in the underlying structs.
- Nulls should only ever be present at the level of the parent column. Child columns should never contain nulls.
- Slice operations on nested columns do not propagate offsets to child columns.

**TODO: Do we still need to ensure the above with the new nested comparators? Since the nested comparators no longer operate based on flattening struct columns, I suspect that we will no longer need to superimpose parent nulls. We'll need to check that, though.**

libcudf APIs _should_ promise to never return "dirty" columns, i.e. columns containing unsanitized data.
Therefore, the only problem is if users construct input columns that are not correctly sanitized and then pass those into libcudf APIs.

> ## libcudf does not synchronize CUDA streams

Reviewer 4: We synchronize streams all the time. I think the intention was to say "We do not go out of our way to synchronize the stream to ensure the data is immediately available after the function returns". 

```suggestion
## libcudf APIs are not always synchronous
```

To give some idea of what should or should not be validated, here are (non-exhaustive) lists of examples.

**Things that libcudf should validate**:
- Input column/table sizes or dtypes

**Things that libcudf should not validate**:
- Integer overflow
- Ensuring that outputs will not exceed the 2GB size limit for a given set of inputs

## libcudf expects nested types to have sanitized null masks

Various libcudf APIs accepting columns of nested dtypes (such as `LIST` or `STRUCT`) may assume that these columns have been sanitized.
In this context, sanitization refers to ensuring that the null elements in a column with a nested dtype are compatible with the elements of nested columns.
Specifically:
- Null elements of list columns should also be empty. The starting offset of a null element should be equal to the ending offset.
- Null elements of struct columns should also be null elements in the underlying structs.
- For compound columns, nulls should only be present at the level of the parent column. Child columns should not contain nulls.
- Slice operations on nested columns do not propagate offsets to child columns.

> **TODO: Do we still need to ensure the above with the new nested comparators? Since the nested comparators no longer operate based on flattening struct columns, I suspect that we will no longer need to superimpose parent nulls. We'll need to check that, though.**

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can resolve this TODO before merging. I don't know exactly what is included in "ensure the above" but in my understanding we want to set the expectation that any/all APIs can _expect_ sanitized inputs with respect to nested nulls, whether or not they currently _rely_ on that behavior.

Author: Ah thanks for spotting that we hadn't addressed this yet. Yeah, that's all that I wanted to get across; even if the comparators don't require it (and as I stated above I think we can get away with it in some cases) we should set that as our API expectation. I'll remove this now.

> 
> **TODO: Do we still need to ensure the above with the new nested comparators? Since the nested comparators no longer operate based on flattening struct columns, I suspect that we will no longer need to superimpose parent nulls. We'll need to check that, though.**

Author: ```suggestion
```

data, a specialized device view for list columns can be constructed via
`lists_column_device_view(column_device_view)`.

# libcudf Policies and Design Principles

`libcudf` is designed to provide GPU-accelerated algorithm primitives for solving a wide variety of problems that arise in data science.
Our goal is to enable diverse use cases like Spark or Pandas to benefit from the performance of GPUs. 
As a result, libcudf prioritizes performance and flexibility, which sometimes may come at the cost of convenience.
While we welcome users to use libcudf directly, we design with the expectation that most users will be consuming libcudf through higher-level layers like Spark or cuDF Python that handle some of details that direct users of libcudf must handle on their own.
We document these policies and the reasons behind them here:

## libcudf does not introspect data

libcudf APIs generally do not perform deep introspection and validation of input data.
There are numerous reasons for this:
1. It violates the single responsibility principle: validation is separate from execution.

> 2. Since libcudf data structures store data on the GPU, any validation incurs _at minimum_ the overhead of a kernel launch, and may in general be prohibitively expensive..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Since libcudf data structures store data on the GPU, any validation incurs _at minimum_ the overhead of a kernel launch, and may in general be prohibitively expensive.
```

3. API promises around data introspection often significantly complicate implementation.

Users are therefore responsible for passing valid data into such APIs.
_Note that this policy does not mean that libcudf performs no validation whatsoever_.
libcudf APIs should still perform any validation that does not require introspection.
To give some idea of what should or should not be validated, here are (non-exhaustive) lists of examples.

**Things that libcudf should validate**:
- Input column/table sizes or dtypes

**Things that libcudf should not validate**:
- Integer overflow
- Ensuring that outputs will not exceed the 2GB size limit for a given set of inputs

> **TODO: What about checking null counts? The most likely path to fixing the implicit kernel invocation in `null_count` (which we have to remove in order to present a safe stream-ordered API) is forcing specification of the null count on construction, which would make checking null counts a cheap operation.**

Author: ```suggestion
```

## libcudf expects nested types to have sanitized null masks

Various libcudf APIs accepting columns of nested dtypes (such as `LIST` or `STRUCT`) may assume that these columns have been sanitized.
In this context, sanitization refers to ensuring that the null elements in a column with a nested dtype are compatible with the elements of nested columns.
Specifically:
- Null elements of list columns should also be empty. The starting offset of a null element should be equal to the ending offset.
- Null elements of struct columns should also be null elements in the underlying structs.

> - Nulls should only ever be present at the level of the parent column. Child columns should never contain nulls.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For compound columns, nulls should only be present at the level of the parent column. Child columns should not contain nulls.
```

- Slice operations on nested columns do not propagate offsets to child columns.

**TODO: Do we still need to ensure the above with the new nested comparators? Since the nested comparators no longer operate based on flattening struct columns, I suspect that we will no longer need to superimpose parent nulls. We'll need to check that, though.**

libcudf APIs _should_ promise to never return "dirty" columns, i.e. columns containing unsanitized data.
Therefore, the only problem is if users construct input columns that are not correctly sanitized and then pass those into libcudf APIs.

## Treat libcudf APIs as if they were asynchronous

libcudf APIs called on the host do not guarantee that the stream is synchronized before returning.

> Work in cudf occurs on `cudf::get_default_stream().value`, which defaults to the CUDA default stream (stream 0).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Work in libcudf occurs on `cudf::get_default_stream().value`, which defaults to the CUDA default stream (stream 0).
```
